The Solar Flare Pulse: Stochastic Signal Recovery


1 Background & Scenario
The Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) has captured a high-cadence time series of a localized
magnetic reconnection event. This “Stellar Flare” exhibits a characteristic oscillation that grows
exponentially as the plasma heats up, followed by a rapid quenching (shutdown) as the magnetic
loop ruptures.
Your task is to extract the physical parameters of this flare from the noise-corrupted sensor
data to predict the energetics of the event.
2 The Analytical Model
The intensity S(t) of the flare is modeled by the following analytical template:
S(t) = A · e
t
· {1 − tanh[2(t − τ )]} · sin(ωt) (1)
Where the parameters represent physical properties of the system:
• A : Intensity Scale (Amplitude). Range: 0 < A < 2
• τ (tau) : Quench Time (Event Peak). Range: 1 < τ < 10
• ω (omega) : Angular Frequency. Range: 1 < ω < 20
3 The Challenge
You are provided with a dataset flare data.csv containing two columns: time (t) and sensor
intensity (ydata). The data is heavily corrupted by noise.
Your goal is to perform a Bayesian Parameter Estimation by implementing a Random
Walk in the 3D parameter space (A, τ, ω) using the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm.
Statistical Assumptions
1. Prior P(θ): Assume uniform (flat) priors within the ranges specified above for all parameters.
2. Likelihood P(D|θ): Assume a relative error of 20% at each data point. The probability
of the data given the parameters is estimated as proportional to exp(L), where the LogLikelihood L is defined as:
L = −
X
i
(ydata,i −
σi
2
ymodel,i)
2
(2)
Where the error σi
is defined relative to the signal strength:
σi = 0.2 · |ydata,i|
Hint: Participants should consider how to handle numerical stability when the signal ydata
crosses zero.
4 Deliverables
Participants must submit a report containing the following:
1. Trace Plots: Graphs showing the evolution of each parameter (A, τ, ω) versus iteration
number. Use these to demonstrate that your MCMC chain has converged.
2. Posterior Distributions: Plot the histograms for the posterior distributions of each
parameter.
3. Best Fit Values: Report the Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) estimates for A, τ , and ω.
4. Source Code: The Python script (or notebook) used to generate the results